---
title: 'Xclim: A Python package extending federated multiprocessing to reproducible climate science'
tags:
  - climate change
  - climate indices
  - climatology
  - hydrology
  - python
  - xarray
authors:
 - name: Trevor James Smith
   orcid: 0000-0001-5393-8359
   affiliation: "1, 2"
 - name: Travis Logan
   affiliation: 1
 - name: Sebastien Biner
   affiliation: 1
 - name: David Huard
   affiliation: 1
 - name: Philippe Roy
   affiliation: "1, 3"
 - name: Ouranos Consortium, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
   index: 1
 - name: Algorithmic Media Observatory, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
   index: 2
 - name: Institut de recherche d'Hydro-Québec (IREQ), Varennes, Québec, Canada.
   index: 3
date: 30 July 2019
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary
Jevons paradox states that as technologies progress to better make use of their resources, the rate of consumption of that resource rises such that demand consistently struggles to be met. For the highly technological domain of climate science, faster computation driving increasingly complex models, more and more frequent ground and satellite observational records, and more accessible server storage has ballooned the amount of data generated by climate researchers in a globally connected world. In order to navigate this data landscape, researchers need to become more specific and strategic in what they examine and make the most use of the resources they have access to. Federated high-performance-computation networks such as Compute Canada/Quebec, Copernicus in Europe, are built from large ensembles of servers with often hundreds of accessible multi-threaded cores to facilitate distributed computing of climate and other physical models. While multiprocessing libraries in Python are becoming more accessible to general programmers and climate researchers, the need to build workflows from the ground up does not lead to a collaborative and clear approach when it comes to the development of climate science.

``Xclim`` is a python library that aims to standardize climate indices and optimize multiprocessing functionalities for hydrologists and climate scientists limited by indice algorithmic complexity and python's GlobalInterpreterLock. Based on climate indices developed in Europe [@project_team_eca&d_algorithm_2013], ``Xclim`` is a set of standardized indices that leverage the federated multiprocessing capabilities of ``Dask`` and the highly-optimized array manipulation algorithms in ``Xarray`` to calculate climate indices while respecting metadata conventions expected of data sets contributing to the realm of climate science and information [@gregory_cf_2003].

# Design philosophy

**TODO: How is xclim different from xarray?** xclim builds on top of xarray and provides reference implementation of climate indices used in various climate studies.

**TODO: {Figure of indice calculated from global data and presented in Panoply/matplotlib}**

**TODO: Speak about reproducible science and the Canadian Climate Data Portal.** An important challenge facing climate scientist is the ability to reproduce an experiment in a given paper. Main constraint is the difficulty to code complex climate indices, the availability of the raw data, etc..

# Usage Examples

# Benchmarking (?)

# Usage in academia and industry

# Acknowledgements

This work was made possible thanks to the financial and strategic contributions of the Canadian Center for Climate Services (CCCS) and Ouranos Consortium. We also acknowlegde and appreciate the bug fixing contributions of David Caron and the contributions of essential features by Jwen-Fai Low to xclim and to the pydata/xarray library that xclim is built from.

# References
